tonight on marketplace it's a guessing
game here how would anybody know a
shopping trip you won't want to miss we
put the food you eat every day to the
test what do you mean by profiteering
people who are engaging in food fraud
question what you buy and buy into when
it comes to filling the cart this was
living inside of me we're about to
reveal food secrets that just may change
the way you eat for good now you're
really freaking me out
ready to go shopping sure Ram we're
picking up a few groceries
grab all those you teaming up with Maria
Leone Oh scarboni okay she's a mom
marketplace viewer and writes a
lifestyle blog okay drive a call from
Maria tries hard to make healthy choices
but that sometimes easier said than done
we've taken popular items you buy every
week to the lab and uncovered food
secrets we're about to share first item
on Maria's grocery list fish this all
looks like it special a Maria looks for
wild salmon cuz she's heard it's better
than farm well I think I'm probably
gonna buy like wild salmon or a wild
soul but once you remove the skin and
fillet a fish let's check out some of
the labels here and see a real mistake
it can be pretty hard to tell what's
what this is Atlantic salmon I am
guessing that that's probably farmed so
how much can you trust those labels to
find out we put fish from the grocery
store to the test over a hundred and
fifty pieces prep them in the
marketplace kitchen then sent him to the
University of Guelph here are some of
the samples that we received from you
biologist Robert Hannah helped develop a
method to genetically identify fish he
can tell us if the fish we paid for is
really the fish we got and what defined
consumers are definitely being ripped
off out of the 153 samples tested more
than one-fifth were mislabeled ranging
from some labeling technicalities to the
wrong fish altogether with the cod you
tested it we thought it was Cod what did
it turn out to be well we found both
haddock and Pollock being substituted
for cod in the market
and the price difference fillet of cod
goes for about $7.99 a pound but get
this Pollack only $4.99 and if you buy
your fish with sustainability in mind
the label just says shark steak and it
actually turned out to be sandbar shark
what's the problem with that well the
problem is that the sandbar shark is a
threatened species that is not supposed
to be in our food chain here in Canada
turns out it's not on the list have
approved fish to sell in Canada I would
say rather weak legislation that doesn't
punish people who substitute one fillet
for another have driven profiteering in
this area what do you mean by
profiteering well people who are
engaging in food fraud what do you think
about the fact that you could be buying
something and paying for something that
you're not actually getting that's
terrible I I want to be able to trust in
the label and know what I'm buying
as for Maria's choice to buy wild salmon
our results exposed problems there too
one of our tests was labeled as Pacific
salmon and when you tested it you found
it was what well we found it farmed
Atlantic salmon and in some cases and
unarmed yeah not wild Pacific salmon not
wild no they're an Atlantic salmon is
often substituted in for wild Pacific
salmon so our first food secret revealed
the fish you buy may not be the fish you
get you're making a choice and yet it
turns out that that choice may not be
accurate right I'm trying to make a
healthier choice and if I'm I'm thinking
I'm buying it but I'm really not yeah
that's that's gonna really upset me
that's why other countries are using DNA
testing to prevent fish fraud but in
Canada we're not doing enough says
Hanner it is disappointing that the that
it was developed here in Canada and
hasn't become part of our policy first
we asked Health Canada for an interview
to ask what's being done to fix all this
mislabeling all we get is a statement
saying the Canadian Food Inspection
Agency is developing a plan to verify
that fish in the marketplace is
appropriately labeled so you gotta grab
some fish yep I'm gonna get this wild
salmon
okay let's hope that's what it is
next up on Maria's shopping trip beef we
sure eat a lot of it about a pound a
week each okay what kind of beef do you
like by the husband really likes steak
so I checked by t-bone or strip sirloin
how did your husband like it cooked just
on the grill
hey how about look yeah these are good
but it's what Maria can't see that we're
about to shine a light on in our next
food secret for that my co-host Tom
Harrington where's the beef in the box
teams up with food safety expert Rick
Holley at the University of Manitoba
everything it's gonna do oh absolutely
this will just be fine
fine for a piece of equipment used in
processing a lot of the beef we eat
something called a mechanical tenderizer
okay we're in business
needles inside this machine are used to
penetrate deep into the meat make our
steaks and roasts more tender but this
microbiologist says that process also
increases the chances of making us sick
so how risky is it we're going to
massage the meat are we yes we are look
at this
we started by slathering the beef with a
special orange dye so the orange gel
here is essentially replicating ecoli
sitting on the surface of the meat right
exactly so in the dark this gel will
show up anywhere it's spread all right
let us feed the beast
the needle marks soon disappear but
we'll still be able to see any Jill that
gets pushed inside turn lights out
please oh look at that so we're in there
in two centimeters three centimeters
scary enough seeing gel pushed into the
meat and when we repeated the test using
really coli ten percent made it deep
inside is that enough to make somebody
say I would have to say it probably
would be in our test we also discovered
you have to cook your steak to at least
medium well to kill any e.coli inside
you think people cook their steaks long
enough to kill ecoli let's say in that
amount inside a steak I don't and that's
our next food secret your beef may be
mechanically tenderized and needs to be
cooked to at least 71 degrees sure not
common knowledge Canadian consumers
continued to be our top priority which
is why Federal Minister of Agriculture
Jerry Ritz promised to introduce labels
for tenderized beef back at the grocery
store
Marie and I look for any sign of labels
so if you see anything here that says
tenderized nothing there just the price
the weight it's a guessing game here how
would anybody know no labels to be found
and when we check more than 20 grocery
stores across the country we only find
one with the right label at a Toronto
fresh go there's a good chance that
something here has gone through that
process and you have no idea it's
annoying because I want to know what I'm
eating and I'm just like there's always
something coming up that you know makes
me question the food industry Health
Canada won't talk on camera about this
one either
instead they email health canada plans
to begin consulting with Canadians in
the coming months and that new labeling
requirements should be in this
created in 2014 so since most tenderized
beef has no labels we designed one of
our own what do you think if we just
stuck that right there this meat has
been mechanically tenderized and you
should cook it to a minimum of 71
degrees was it hard to come up with but
Canadians it seems we'll have to wait
when we come back ami what's for dinner
tonight the safest way to make your
family's favorite meal and a popular
lunch meat comes clean or does it that
does surprise me actually
we're cruising the grocery store
revealing secrets behind some of the
familiar foods you put in your cart
helping us out marketplace viewer Maria
Leone owes Carboni next on her list
chicken do you guys eat a lot of chicken
at home
oh we do I try to mix it up chicken is
the most popular meat in Canada so
farmers want to grow them big fast I
often wonder with larger ones what
they're feeding the chickens to make
them grow so big so fast well you're
concerned about what they might be
getting as they're being raised right
and when we reveal our next food secret
she may be even more concerned all that
but first there we go back to Maria's
mommy what's for dinner tonight Maria's
extra careful when she preps chicken
because she knows bugs like Salmonella
can make you sick but she doesn't know
just how sick at mcmaster Hospital in
Hamilton we meet up with a guy who found
that out the hard way I'm a pretty
healthy guy I'm in good shape I exercise
and I do all the sort of the right
things and this hit me hit me really
hard Jerry Wright was sick from food
poisoning for months IV antibiotics
weren't working
I guess about 24 hours after I was at
the hospital they called me up to tell
me or guess what you have Salmonella
growing in your bloodstream and this is
why you're so sick turns out he'd been
infected with a strain of Salmonella
resistant to antibiotics a superbug how
serious is that well you can die from
sepsis so why are bugs like this
becoming resistant because farmers give
the same antibiotics we use to animals
like chickens to prevent disease and to
make them grow bigger faster the problem
is the more drugs used the more
resistant the bacteria on chickens get
turning them in to superbugs to find out
how often these superbugs end up on
grocery store chicken Parker please put
that to the test
- chicken leg bought a hundred samples
of chicken and took them to the lab for
analysis
what we found 2/3 had at least one super
bug get sick from one of them some
antibiotics may not work miss chief
Jerry Wright says our test results
should be a real wake-up call and he
would know not only did he get sick from
one of these bugs he's also the head of
infectious disease research at McMaster
University this was in your bloodstream
this was living inside of me
yes stronger antibiotics help right pull
through but he worries we're running out
of options
it's the bugs against the drugs and the
bugs are winning and worse news recent
studies show the number of some
superbugs on chicken is on the rise so
take note of our next food secret your
chicken may be contaminated with
superbugs honestly I thought our food
industry was a lot better here I was
watching you prepare your chicken today
how confident are you that you didn't
get cross-contamination anywhere um I
usually been pretty good with that I
think anyways so what will she think of
our next test when we asked two
volunteers to do the same thing Maria
just did cook some chicken I'm going to
grab some chicken here but this time
under the watchful eye of UBC food
microbiologist Kevin Allen who first
covered the chicken in that special gel
to see what get contaminated there we go
okay the volunteers got cooking so
thinking that will maybe bake these
we'll do a little stir-fry baking the
chicken will kill any superbugs but we
turned off the lights to see if
contamination from the raw chicken had
spread first Allen checked the frying
pan it's actually quite intense
then the bowl the tea towel and their
hands we can see some of the
contamination
contamination from the chicken showed up
even though our volunteer washed her
hands three times it's it still life my
parents still contagious for months so
how confident are you now that you know
it would be okay if we turned out the
light no no I would I would have to
clean and scrub everything up again
because these germs spread so easily we
want to know what Health Canada is doing
to fight the rise of superbugs they tell
us they're actively working to promote
antimicrobial stewardship and the
chicken farmers of Canada they say
they're working to control monitor and
reduce antimicrobial use in chicken
farming coming up why you'll want to
take a closer look at your sandwich meat
swine behind that we're putting some of
the most popular foods we eat to the
test
revealing food secrets some might prefer
you might not know the final item to
pick up deli meat probably buy something
the natural selections when Maria gives
her family cold cuts she opts for what
she thinks is a healthier choice they
believes natural selections brand turkey
with natural ingredients no
preservatives added no preservatives
sounds good to her she wants to avoid
nitrites a common preservative and no
wonder nitrites may be one reason deli
meats been linked to cancer
important to Maria because what she buys
here okay I'm going to make you guys
some turkey sandwiches for tomorrow okay
goes in here children's lunches here at
first glance the deli meat Maria bought
appears to be preservative free but look
closer beyond those naturally occurring
preservatives and nitrates in the
ingredients yep see that simple sounding
ingredient cultured celery extract it's
actually a nitrite by another name but
the people get that not most of these
shoppers my assumption is but they would
be try to suggest that this is better
for you I looked in the cultural celery
extract and I figured okay it's
dehydrated celery not too bad I think
it's misleading and that's our final
food secret all packaged deli meats have
preservatives you're a savvy shopper you
read labels and even this wasn't clear
to you yeah it definitely went under the
radar for me you feel deceived yeah I do
my belief tells us they provide
information so that consumers can
purchase food that is right for them but
changes may be coming we learn the
Canadian Food Inspection Agency is
reviewing the use of certain claims on
deli meats made with the cultured celery
ingredient
so until things change some Survival
Guide tips for your next grocery trip
watch out for tricky labels making
chicken cook thoroughly and wash up well
to avoid the spread of bugs and ask if
the thief you're buying has been
tenderized if so cook it at least medium
well chicken our food secrets leave our
marketplace shopper armed for her next
grocery shop but frustrated I mean I
shouldn't have to worry so much about
you know what I'm feeding my family hey
it should be a lot simpler than it is
today